---
layout: archive
title: "Practical Natural Language Processing"
permalink: nlp2023/
author_profile: false

---
<style type='text/css'>
h2, h3, h4, h5, h6 {margin: 0;}
.br {display: block; margin-bottom: 0em; margin: 0;} 
</style>

{% include base_path %}

## Instructor: Rasika Bhalerao
### r.bhalerao@northeastern.edu
### Northeastern University Khoury College of Computer Sciences
### Spring 2023
### Lectures: Thursdays 9am - 12:20pm in room 1010
### Office hours: Tuesdays 10am - 12pm outside room 1010
### TAs:
- Sai Swetha Pasam (pasam.s@northeastern.edu)
- Raghav Sharma (sharma.rag@northeastern.edu)
<br/>

Assignment submission is on Canvas.

This course will provide an introduction to various techniques in natural language processing with a focus on practical use. Topics will include bag-of-words, English syntactic structures, part-of-speech tagging, parsing algorithms, anaphora/coreference resolution, word representations, deep learning, language models, and a brief introduction to current new models.

The course will cover basic implementations in Python as well as APIs and tools for advanced text processing. There will be brief weekly assignments, a midterm exam, and a final project including a programming component, a written report, and a short presentation.

<br/>


| Date   | Topic                                                                                         | Slides | Assignment Due |
|--------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------|----------------|
| Jan 12  | Introduction, Review Python and Machine Learning                                             |        |                |
| Jan 19 | Bag of Words, Tfidf, Naive Bayes                                                              |        | Assignment 1   |
| Jan 26 | English Syntactic Structures and Part-of-Speech Tagging                                       |        | Assignment 2, <br/> Statement of project interest |
| Feb 2 | POS Tagging and Parsing Algorithms                                                             |     | Assignment 3 |
| Feb 9  | Constituency and Dependency Parsing                                                           |  | Assignment 4 |
| Feb 16 | Coreference Resolution                                                                        |  | Assignment 5 |
| Feb 23 | Unsupervised Learning, Discuss practice midterm exam                                          |  | Project proposal, <br> Practice midterm (recommended) |
| Mar 2 | **Midterm Exam**                                                                              |        | The midterm exam <br> (instructions on Canvas) |
| Mar 16  | Deep Learning and Word Representations                                                        |  | Assignment 6 |
| Mar 23  | Deep Learning and Language Models                                                             |  |                |
| Mar 30 | Commonly Used Python tools and APIs                                                           |  |                |
| Apr 6 | Selected Topics voted on by students: knowledge graphs, web search engines (+ TextRank), transfer learning, chat / dialogue  |  | Assignment 7 |
| Apr 13 | Recent Advances and Current Research in NLP                                                   |  |  |
| Apr 20  | **Final Project Presentations**                                                               |        | Final paper due |


<br/>

### Learning Objectives:
- A solid understanding of the basics of natural language processing (NLP)
- Hands-on implementation of basic algorithms in NLP
- Familiarity with the challenges of NLP
- Broadened ideas of how NLP affects the world
- Exposure to current research

### Prerequisites:
- Experience with/willingness to quickly learn Python
- A course in algorithms and data structures
- Interest in practical natural language processing

### Resources
- Textbook: ["Speech and Language Processing" by Daniel Jurafsky and James H. Martin](https://web.stanford.edu/~jurafsky/slp3/)
- Blog posts and websites posted in class
- Lecture slides on course website

### Grades
- 20%  Midterm exam
- 30%  Weekly assignments
- 50%  Final project
  - 2%  Statement of interest
  - 5%  Proposal
  - 10% Paper draft
  - 15% Presentation
  - 18% Final paper

### Policies


### Final Project
The final project should address a problem by applying existing NLP techniques. Examples include predicting a culture trend using Reddit, or figuring out the meanings of emojis in Venmo payments.

The final project will be done in groups of 3 or 4 students. In most cases, all students in the group will receive the same grade. In the case of *extreme* imbalance in work distribution, grades for each student in the group will be adjusted based on participation. The final project grade will come from five components: statement of interest, proposal, paper draft, presentation, and final paper.

Each student will submit a **statement of interest**, which is up to a paragraph describing a topic on which you would be interested in doing a project. It is okay at this stage to be unsure or have half-formed ideas. I will then assign students into groups based on topics. Students who don't submit this statement will be randomly assigned.

Each group will submit a **project proposal**. The goal for the project proposal is to get feedback on feasibility and check for any anticipated missing pieces. It should be a few paragraphs (up to a page) describing:
- Your idea
- The problem you are solving
- Where you will get data
- What NLP you will do
- How you will evaluate your methods
- Anything else needed to understand your project

Each group will submit a **paper draft**, which is essentially the first half of the final paper. There is no length guideline, and you will not be penalized for lack of results at this stage. It should:
- introduce and motivate your problem and solution
- explain how others have solved similar problems (if applicable)
- describe your dataset
- explain any results

Each group will give a **9-minute presentation** on Zoom on December 7. It is recommended to have one person share a screen with slides. The presentation should have:
- introduction
- motivation for the problem
- description of the dataset
- explanation of the NLP and other methods used
- preliminary results
- conclusion

Each group will submit a **final paper**. The paper should include:
- Introduction / motivation / description of the problem
- Brief description of how others have solved similar problems
- Description of the dataset and where you got it
- Explanation of NLP and other methods used
- Results / discussion of results (Did you solve the problem?)
- Conclusion
- Works cited
