index.md, before:

---
title: Rasika Bhalerao
layout: home
---

<a href="https://rasikabh.github.io"><img src="https://github.com/rasikabh/rasikabh.github.io/blob/master/bhalerao.jpg?raw=true" align="right" height="400" ></a>

# Rasika Bhalerao

I am a PhD student in computer science at NYU working with Professor [Damon McCoy](http://damonmccoy.com). 
I am interested in cybercrime, natural language processing, machine learning, and teaching.

## Contact
NYU email: rasikabh [at] nyu [dot] edu  
Personal email: rasikabh [at] gmail [dot] com  
[LinkedIn page](https://www.linkedin.com/in/rasika-bhalerao-8a827188)  
[Resume](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1h_ZbhhuRRcVPSLuSCOy5YDEDEkWsC_uR/view?usp=sharing)

## Teaching
#### Lecturer for Artificial Intelligence course at NYU (CS-GY 6613)
Sept 2013 - June 2017  
Instructed graduate course of 50 students and two TAs
#### Course Assistant for Security Analytics course at NYU (experimental course) (CS-GY 9223)
Sept 2018 - Dec 2018  
Helped design new course on security analytics under Prof. Damon McCoy. Created homework assignments, gave several lectures, graded, helped students, etc.
#### Course Assistant for Network Security course at NYU (CS-GY 6823)
Sept 2017 - May 2018  
Assisted with Network Security course, focusing on assigned labs
#### Teaching Assistant for Computer Science I/II at University of Washington (CSE 142/143/143X)
Jan 2015 - June 2017  
9 quarters. Taught weekly discussion sections, held office hours, graded assignments

## Research
#### Research and Development Intern at Flashpoint Intel, New York, NY
June 2018 - Dec 2018  
Conducted classified NLP, statistics, and security-related research projects and developed tools for exploration of the deep & dark web
#### Research assistant at International Computer Science Institute, Berkeley, CA
June 2018 - Sept 2017  
Machine learning, natural language processing, and security research analyzing underground forums to identify illegal products  
[Resulting publication](https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.00381)
#### Applied Math research (REU) at UC Los Angeles
June 2016 - Aug 2016  
Developed an algorithm for processing hyperspectral imagery  
[Resulting 2017 IEEE publication](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7953347)
#### Research intern at University of Washington Image Research Laboratory
June 2014 - Aug 2015  
Used MATLAB and Arduino to analyze light signals transmitted through finger. Worked with researchers and fellows at UW Medical Center Dept. of Radiology.

## Education
#### New York University
Sept 2017 - present  
PhD in Computer Science
#### University of Washington, Seattle, WA
Sept 2013 - June 2017  
BS in Applied & Computational Math Sciences (Discrete Math & Algorithms)  
BS in Statistics
#### Forest Ridge School of the Sacred Heart, Bellevue, WA
Sept 2005 - June 2013  
International Baccalaureate Diploma  
Women’s Technology Program at MIT June-July 2012  
Excellence in Mathematics: Top mathematician in grade level (Grades 9, 11, 12)  
Spirit Award: Most spirited and friendly person in high school (Grade 12)

## Society of Women Engineers
#### Grad: Social media coordinator for GradSWE
[Check out GradSWE!](http://gradswe.swe.org/joinfollowcontact-us.html)
#### Sophomore year undergrad: Director of Evening with Industry for University of Washington section
800-member career fair and 200-member banquet
#### Junior/Senior year undergrad: Treasurer for University of Washington section
Section membership grew tenfold, $50,000 budget (something to be proud of)

Commit message:

Spotify intern, SWE FY19, CSAW, SecAna co-inst

index.md, after:

---
title: Rasika Bhalerao
layout: home
---

<a href="https://rasikabh.github.io"><img src="https://github.com/rasikabh/rasikabh.github.io/blob/master/bhalerao.jpg?raw=true" align="right" height="400" ></a>

# Rasika Bhalerao

I am a PhD student in computer science at NYU working with Professor [Damon McCoy](http://damonmccoy.com). 
I am interested in cybercrime, natural language processing, machine learning, and teaching.

## Contact
NYU email: rasikabh [at] nyu [dot] edu  
Personal email: rasikabh [at] gmail [dot] com  
[LinkedIn page](https://www.linkedin.com/in/rasika-bhalerao-8a827188)  
[Resume](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1h_ZbhhuRRcVPSLuSCOy5YDEDEkWsC_uR/view?usp=sharing)

## Teaching
#### Co-Instructor for Security Analytics course at NYU (CS-GY 9223 / CS-UY 3943)
Fall 2019 (Sept 2019 - Dec 2019)
Co-instructor for second iteration of course on security analytics with Prof. Damon McCoy. Planned and gave several lectures, oversaw TA, etc.
#### Instructor for Artificial Intelligence course at NYU (CS-GY 6613)
Instructed graduate course of 50 students and two TAs
#### Course Assistant for Security Analytics course at NYU (experimental course) (CS-GY 9223)
Fall 2018 (Sept 2018 - Dec 2018)
Helped design new course on security analytics under Prof. Damon McCoy. Created homework assignments, gave several lectures, graded, helped students, etc.
#### Course Assistant for Network Security course at NYU (CS-GY 6823)
Sept 2017 - May 2018  
Assisted with Network Security course, focusing on assigned labs
#### Teaching Assistant for Computer Science I/II at University of Washington (CSE 142/143/143X)
Jan 2015 - June 2017  
9 quarters. Taught weekly discussion sections, held office hours, graded assignments

## Research
#### Tech Research Intern at Spotify, Boston, MA
June 2019 - August 2019
Research project for Language in Learning Technologies lab to filter podcast content quality
#### Research and Development Intern at Flashpoint Intel, New York, NY
June 2018 - Dec 2018  
Conducted classified NLP, statistics, and security-related research projects and developed tools for exploration of the deep & dark web
#### Research assistant at International Computer Science Institute, Berkeley, CA
June 2018 - Sept 2017  
Machine learning, natural language processing, and security research analyzing underground forums to identify illegal products 

[Resulting publication](https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.00381)
#### Applied Math research (REU) at UC Los Angeles
June 2016 - Aug 2016  
Developed an algorithm for processing hyperspectral imagery  
[Resulting 2017 IEEE publication](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7953347)
#### Research intern at University of Washington Image Research Laboratory
June 2014 - Aug 2015  
Used MATLAB and Arduino to analyze light signals transmitted through finger. Worked with researchers and fellows at UW Medical Center Dept. of Radiology.

## Society of Women Engineers
#### FY20: Communications coordinator for GradSWE
#### FY19: Social media coordinator for GradSWE
[Check out GradSWE!](http://gradswe.swe.org/joinfollowcontact-us.html)
#### FY17 (Junior/Senior year undergrad): Treasurer for University of Washington section
Section membership grew tenfold, $50,000 budget
#### FY18 (Sophomore year undergrad): Director of Evening with Industry for University of Washington section
800-member career fair and 200-member banquet (something to be proud of)

## Other Service
#### [CSAW '19 Applied Research Competition] (https://csaw.engineering.nyu.edu/research) Co-Chair

## Education
#### New York University
Sept 2017 - present  
PhD in Computer Science
#### University of Washington, Seattle, WA
Sept 2013 - June 2017  
BS in Applied & Computational Math Sciences (Discrete Math & Algorithms)  
BS in Statistics
#### Forest Ridge School of the Sacred Heart, Bellevue, WA
Sept 2005 - June 2013  
International Baccalaureate Diploma  
Women’s Technology Program at MIT June-July 2012  
Excellence in Mathematics: Top mathematician in grade level (Grades 9, 11, 12)  
Spirit Award: Most spirited and friendly person in high school (Grade 12)
